Terminal Basics Cheatsheet
NOTES
./
	A special directory on *nix systems that refers to the current directory.  

../
	A special directory that is used to refer to the parent directory.

*
	A common placeholder for "all" or "all files".

DOCUMENTATION
man command
	Retrieves the man page (manual) for a particular command (ex. cp, rm, mv, emacs, g++,
	etc.).  Use the letter q to exit and /string to search the page.


NAVIGATION
pwd
	"Print Working Directory".  Prints the exact path of the current working directory.

ls -l
	Lists (long format) all files in a directory.

clear
	Clears the screen

cd path/name
	Changes the current working directory to the directory name

cp -r source destination
	Recursively copies the contents of the directory "source" to the directory named
	"destination".

up/down arrows
	Cycle through history.


FILE MANIPULATION

touch filename
	Creates a plain text file named "file".  If such a file already exists,
	touch updates the file's timestamp (useful for recompiling).

cat filename
	Prints the file filename.

less filename
	View file on terminal without editing (use q to exit).

cp source destination
	Creates a copy of the file "source" named "destination".

mv source_file destination_file
	Renames the file "source" as "destination".

mv source/file destination/file
	Moves a file from the directory source to destination.  If the names
	of the file are different in the source and destination paths the file
	will also be renamed.
	Note: source and destination may be exact or relative paths.

rm file
	Deletes a file named "file".
	Note: A *nix terminal has no "recycling bin" or "trash bin".  For
	practical reasons (_not_ reasons of security), you should consider
	deletes using rm to be permanent.


DIRECTORIES
mkdir name
    Makes a new directory named name.

rmdir name
	Removes the current directory (empty directory only).

mv source destination
	Renames (moves) the directory "source" to the name "destination".

FILE EDITING
emacs filename
	Opens a file named filename in the emacs text editor.  Recommended for
	advanced users.

vim file
	Opens a file named filename in the vim text editor.  Recommended for
	advanced users.

nano file
	Opens a file named "file" in the nano text editor.  Recommended for users who desire a
	simpler file editing experience that requires learning fewer commands.	


COMPILING C++ PROGRAMS
g++ file.cpp -o executable
	The simplest way to invoke the g++ compiler.  Compiles (and links) file.cpp
	to produce an executable named "executable".

g++ -c file1.cpp file2.cpp ... fileN.cpp
    Compiles each fileX.cpp file into an (unlinked) object file named fileX.o.

g++ file1.o file2.o ... fileN.o -o executable
	Links the listed .o files to produce an executable named "executable".



PRINTING
lpr file -num_copies
	Send file to the default printer.  Optionally, specify num_copies as the
	number of copies to print.

lpq
	View the current print queue.

lprm job_id
	Cancels print job job-id (see lpq for job-id).

lpstat -p -d
	List current printers including the default.

lpoptions -d printer_name



MISC
chmod
	Changes permissions of file.  See the manpage for usage details.

grep "pattern" file
	Searches for instances of "pattern" in file and prints matching lines.

Ctrl+C
	Halt current command.

find start_directory -name "filename"
	Starts searching at the directory start_directory for a file named filename.

head filename
	Display the first 10 lines of filename.

tail filename
	Display the last 10 lines of filename.
